A Friendly Beginner's Guide to TypeScript (#1311)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/a-friendly-beginner-guide-to-typescript/index.md

> # What is TypeScript?

Author: Done

TypeScript is a programming language that extends JavaScript by adding types. It saves time catching errors and providing fixes before you run code, so by understanding JavaScript everything comes in handy.

## Table of contents

- TypeScript Basics
- Compiler Configurations
- Classes & Interfaces
- Typescript Features
- Namespaces and Module
- Conclusion

## Prerequisite

- Basic knowledge of JavaScript

In this article, I will show you some important guidelines to learn typescript but have in mind that practicing is the best way to learn. Let's get started 😊

## TypeScript Basics

### Boolean

This data type is simply a true/false

```
let isOpen: Boolean = true;
```

### Number

TypeScript Supports floating-point values or BigIntegers

```
let decimal: number = 6;
let hex: number = 0xf00d;
let binary: number = 0b1010;
let octal: number = 0o744;
let big: bigint = 100n;
```

### String

TypeScript uses single (') or double(") quote similar to JavaScript.

```
let colour: string = "yellow";
color = 'white';
```

> Template Strings is also valid in typeScript and can be used without limitations.

Reviewer: "Template strings are..."

Author: Fixed

```
let fullName: string = `Idris Olubisi`;
let age: number = 47;
let text: string = `Hello, my name is ${fullName}.`
```

### Enum

Enum in TypeScript is a special class that contains constant values. By default enum numbering start from the index zero.

```
enum Fruits {
  Orange,
  Apple,
  Banana,
}
// can be accessed by
let c: Fruits = Fruits.Apple;
```

You can manually access set the number of an enum.

```
enum Fruits {
  Orange = 1,
  Apple = 4,
  Banana= 7
}
// can be accessed by

> let c: Fruits = Fruits.Bannana;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let c: Fruits = Fruits.Banana;
```

Author: Done

```

### Array

> TypeScript also supports array similar to javascript and its represented as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypeScript also supports arrays. They are represented as;
```

Author: Fixed

```
let listOfNumbers: number[] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
```

### Object

An object in TypeScript is an instance that contains a set of key-value pairs. It gives a compilation error whenever you try to access a value that does not exist in a given object.

```
var person = {
   firstName:"Idris",
   lastName:"Olubisi"
};
```

### Any

The type `Any` allows us to assign “any” particular value to a variable, similar to what we have in JavaScript.

```
let amount: any;
amount = 26;
amount = true;
amount = "Hello World";
amount = [];
amount = {};
amount = null;
amount = undefined;
```

### Unknown

> This works similar to Any but when you try to reassign the value initialized to a new variable then you get an error, Which means anything is assignable to unknown but itself and `any`core types.

Reviewer: This sentence is hard to read. Please rephrase it.

Author: Done

```
let amount: unknown;
// Error
let newAmount: number = amount;
```

### Void

A void in TypeScript is set when it's certain that a function is not returning a value.

```
function greetings(): void {
  console.log("Hi everyone 😊");
}
```

You can also check out the [TypeScript Doc](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs) to learn more about the types and basics in TypeScript.

## Compiler Configurations

> tsconfig.json is used to specify the root files and the compiler options required to compile the project whenever `tsc` is run locally. e.g

Reviewer: Add backticks to the file name.

Author: Added

    /* Experimental Options */
    // "experimentalDecorators": true,        /* Enables experimental support for ES7 decorators. */
    // "emitDecoratorMetadata": true,         /* Enables experimental support for emitting type metadata for decorators. */
    "noEmitOnError": true,
    /* Advanced Options */
    "skipLibCheck": true /* Skip type checking of declaration files. */,
    "forceConsistentCasingInFileNames": true /* Disallow inconsistently-cased references to the same file. */
  }
  // "exclude": [
  //   "node_modules" exclude by default
  // ]
}

```

Most of the configurations are commented out but you can uncomment where necessary after reading the description attached to it on the right-hand side.

### To run your TypeScript File

- Configure typescript using the ` tsconfig.json` file.
- Run `tsc --watch`, so that every time you change a `.ts` file, tsc will compile it and produce the output in any folder configured e.g a dist folder.
- Use nodemon to watch if files in ./dist have changed and if needed to relaunch the server.

configure your script in package.json to look like this

> ```

Reviewer: Add the language name after the opening backticks. Do this for all code snippets.

Author: Done

"scripts": {
    "clean": "rimraf dist",
    "build": "tsc",
    "watch:build": "tsc --watch",
    "watch:server": "nodemon './dist/index.js' --watch './dist'",
    "start": "npm-run-all clean build --parallel watch:build watch:server --print-label"
  },
```

## Classes & Interfaces

> Interface in TypeScript is a structured group of properties that describe an object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An interface is a structured group of properties that describe an object.
```

Author: > 

Done

> Class is a blueprint from which we can create objects that share the same configuration or properties and methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A class is a blueprint from which we can create objects that share the same configuration or properties and methods.
```

Author: Done
